docs: tutorial for WebSockets with AsyncAPI (#2245)
asyncapi/website: pages/docs/tutorials/getting-started/slackbot-websocket-tutorial.md

---
title: Creating an AsyncAPI Document for a SlackBot in Socket Mode
description: In this tutorial, you'll learn how to create an AsyncAPI document designed for a Slack application that operates in Socket Mode.
weight: 80
---

## Introduction
In this tutorial, you will learn how to generate an AsyncAPI document designed for a Slack application that operates in Socket Mode. Our aim is to help you grasp a real-world application of AsyncAPI with the WebSocket protocol.

Consider a scenario where you are in charge of maintaining a highly active Slack workspace. You want an easy way to keep track of the popular messages across all the channels but doing this manually would be a difficult task. To simplify this process, you’re going to build a Slackbot called my-slack-bot that actively monitors reactions added to a message and determine its popularity by counting the reactions of the “heart” emoji.

> Here’s a visual representation of how my-slack-bot should work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here’s a visual representation of how your heart-counting Slack bot should work.
```

You start your AsyncAPI document by specifying the AsyncAPI version and essential information about your Slack application's API which includes details such as the `title`, `version` and `description`.

The `ws` server section allows you to define the protocol and specify information about the URLs your application will use, such as  `host`, `pathname`, and `description`.

The WebSocket URL is generated  by invoking the [apps.connections.open](https://api.slack.com/methods/apps.connections.open) method from Slack’s API. You use the authorization tokens obtained during the configuration of  my-slack-bot to generate this URL.

```
asyncapi: '3.0.0'
info:
  title: MySlackBot API
  version: '1.0.0'
  description:  |
    The MySlackBot App manages popular messages in a workspace by monitoring message reaction data from Slack's Event API.
    
servers:
  ws:
    host: wss://wss-primary.slack.com/
    pathname: link/?ticket=13748dac-b866-4ea7-b98e-4fb7895c0a7f&app_id=fe684dfa62159c6ac646beeac31c8f4ef415e4f39c626c2dbd1530e3a690892f
    protocol: wss
    description: "Websocket URL generated to communicate with Slack"
```

## Define Operations and Channels

> The  `operation` property, is all about defining specific tasks your application can perform. Essentially, it's how my-slack-bot interacts with Slack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The  `operation` property, is all about defining specific tasks your application can perform. Essentially, it's how `my-slack-bot` interacts with Slack.
```

always when you mention `my-slack-bot` in this document, please make it with back tick so it renders as code,

> In this example, the `helloListenerOperation` keeps an eye out for the message sent by the Slack server when a WebSocket connection is successfully established. On the other hand, the `reactionListener` is focused on the reaction_added event type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, the `helloListenerOperation` keeps an eye out for the message sent by the Slack server when a WebSocket connection is successfully established. On the other hand, the `reactionListenerOperation ` is focused on the `reaction_added` event type.
```

> Your Slack application is designed to be notified of events within your workspace. It does this by subscribing to a specific event type making use of Slack's Event API.  So in this case the `action` property in both the operations is set to receive events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Application `my-slack-bot` is designed to be notified of events within your workspace. It does this by subscribing to a specific event type making use of Slack's Event API.  So in this case the `action` property in both the operations is set to `receive` events.
```

> Now, moving on to the `channels` section. The `address` specifies where the channel is tuned in to receive messages while the `messages`  property  defines the structure of the event it's set up to handle.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be first in this section, channels are first, operations later. This way first you can just change only channels in the yaml example, and later when you talk about operations, you show both, to make references visible

```
channels:
  reactionListener:
    address: /
    messages:
      reactionListener:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/reactionListenerMessage'
  
  helloListener:
    address: /
    messages:
      helloListener:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/helloListenerMessage'

operations:
  helloListenerOperation:
    action: receive
    channel:
      $ref: "#/channels/helloListener"

  reactionListenerOperation:
    action: receive
    channel: 
      $ref: "#/channels/reactionListener"
```

## Define Messages and Schemas

Your AsyncAPI document needs to be very clear on the type of event it is expected to receive. Here's where the `messages` component steps in. Using the `payload` property, you can specify what these events should look like, their structure, and what content they carry.

> And that brings us to what the `payload` attribute does. It specifies the name, format, and description of all expected properties, and can even set constant values that must be followed during schema validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That leads us to the function of the `payload` attribute. It specifies the name, format, and description of all expected properties and can even set constant values that must be followed during schema validation.
```

For example, in `reactionPayload` schema definition, any API message received from this channel must follow the constant value for the "reaction" property which is clearly defined as “heart”.

> The const value feature ensures that the data exchanged through your API complies with your specified constants, helping to maintain data integrity and accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `const` value feature ensures that the data exchanged through your API complies with your specified constants, helping to maintain data integrity and accuracy.
```

```
components:
  messages:
    reactionListenerMessage:
      summary: "Action triggered when channel receives a new event of type reaction-added"
      payload:
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/reactionPayload'
    
    helloListenerMessage:
      summary: "Action triggered when a successful WebSocket connection is established."
      payload:
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/helloPayload'

  schemas:
    reactionPayload:
      type: object
      properties:
        user:
          type: string

>           description: ID of the user who performed this event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          description: user ID who performed this event
```

        reaction:
          type: string
          description: The only reaction that we need is a heart emoji
          const: "heart"
        item_user:
          type: string
          description: ID of the user that created the original item that has been reacted to
        item:
          type: object
          properties:
            channel:
              type: string
              description: Channel information of original message
            ts:
              type: string
              description: Timestamp information of original message.
        event_ts:
          type: string

>           description: Timestamp of reaction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          description: Reaction timestamp
```

    helloPayload:
      type: object
      properties:
        type:
          type: string
          description: A hello string confirming WS connection
          const: "hello"
        connection_info:
          type: object
          properties:
            app_id:
              type: string
        num_connections:
          type: integer
        debug_info:
          type: object
          properties:
            host:
              type: string
            started:
              type: string
            build_number:
              type: integer
            approximate_connection_time:
              type: integer
```

> And there you have it! Putting these blocks together gives you your AsyncAPI document all ready to go.

Reviewer: remember: do not start sentences with conjunctions 😄✌🏽

```
asyncapi: '3.0.0'
info:
  title: MySlackBot API
  version: '1.0.0'
  description:  |
    The MySlackBot App manages popular messages in a workspace by monitoring message reaction data from Slack's Event API.
    
servers:
  ws:
    host: wss://wss-primary.slack.com/

>     pathname: link/?ticket=13748dac-b866-4ea7-b98e-4fb7895c0a7f&app_id=fe684dfa62159c6ac646beeac31c8f4ef415e4f39c626c2dbd1530e3a690892f

Reviewer 2: @KhudaDad414 ideally this query params should not be here and instead should be part of websocket binding

if we add it as binding on the server, will it still work with Glee? does glee understand `query` on binding level? -> https://github.com/asyncapi/bindings/tree/master/websockets#channel-binding-object

Reviewer 3: I had the same question. @VaishnaviNandakumar 
you can read more on it here:
https://asyncapi.slack.com/archives/C0230UAM6R3/p1698241017534699

          const: "heart"
        item_user:
          type: string
          description: ID of the user that created the original item that has been reacted to
        item:
          type: object
          properties:
            channel:
              type: string
              description: Channel information of original message
            ts:
              type: string
              description: Timestamp information of original message.
        event_ts:
          type: string
          description: Timestamp of reaction

    helloPayload:
      type: object
      properties:
        type:
          type: string
          description: A hello string confirming WS connection
          const: "hello"
        connection_info:
          type: object
          properties:
            app_id:
              type: string
        num_connections:
          type: integer
        debug_info:
          type: object
          properties:
            host:
              type: string
            started:
              type: string
            build_number:
              type: integer
            approximate_connection_time:
              type: integer
```

## Summary

> In this tutorial, you were introduced to a practical application of WebSocket protocols within an AsyncAPI document. In our future tutorials, we'll dive deeper into more advanced concepts and explore the extensive features of AsyncAPI. 

Reviewer: - what we learnt
- what we built
- how this applies to real life cases

> ---

Reviewer 4: Hi Vaisihnavi, 
Your tutorial is placed in the wrong section i.e. `https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/getting-started`, 
![image](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/assets/52382282/548a8f63-110e-4ae5-96c8-d68db396f94b)

You'll need to move it into the parent directory i.e. `https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials`

Author: Thanks @J0SAL !!

> title: Create an AsyncAPI Document for a SlackBot with WebSockets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slackbot with WebSockets
```

oops, let's be consistent with spelling.. check the rest of your document to ensure you spell Slackbot consistently and fix accordingly.

description: In this tutorial, you'll learn how to create an AsyncAPI document designed for a Slack application that operates in Socket Mode using the WebSockets protocol.

> weight: 80

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
weight: 140
```

Hello Vaishnavi,
After moving the document to the correct folder, as suggested by Joy, I also suggest updating the weight to  140 because we want the 'streetlight' tutorial to be the last document in the folder.

Author: Thanks @CynthiaPeter

---

## Introduction
In this tutorial, you will learn how to generate an AsyncAPI document designed for a Slack application that operates in Socket Mode. The aim is to help you grasp a real-world application of AsyncAPI with the WebSocket protocol.

> Consider a scenario where you are in charge of maintaining a highly active Slack workspace. You want an easy way to keep track of the popular messages across all the channels but doing this manually would be a difficult task. To simplify this process, you’re going to build a Slackbot called `Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot` that actively monitors reactions added to a message and determine its popularity by counting the reactions of the “heart” emoji.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Consider a scenario where you are in charge of maintaining a highly active Slack workspace. You want an easy way to keep track of the popular messages across all the channels but doing this manually would be a difficult task. To simplify this process, you’re going to build a Slackbot called `Heart-Counter-Slackbot` that actively monitors reactions added to a message and determine its popularity by counting the reactions of the “heart” emoji.
```

According to [official Slack documentation](https://slack.com/intl/en-in/help/articles/202026038-An-introduction-to-Slackbot), **Slackbot** should be a single word. Please correct other mentions of the same.

Reviewer 3: I would consider changing the name entirely. `Slackbot` is a `user` inside a slack workspace that can read/write data. but `Heart-Counter-Slackbot` is an app(not a bot) that interact with the slack server. it can post messages as the bot since it has it's api key but it is not the bot itself. 

I suggest something like `Heart-Counter` or `Heart-Counter-App`

Author: @KhudaDad414 So does that mean that the reaction listening functionality is that of a Slack App's and not a Bot's?
If we're renaming all occurrences, would it be more suitable to title it as `Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slack app with WebSockets`?

Reviewer 2: `Heart-Counter-App` is fine but if you still want slackbot in name then do `Heart-Counter-Slackbot-App`

Reviewer 2: `Heart-Counter` shortest and best

Here’s a visual representation of how `Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot` should work: 

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot
participant Slack Server (Socket Mode)
participant User

Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot ->>Slack Server (Socket Mode): Connect
Note right of Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot: Establish WebSocket connection

Slack Server (Socket Mode)->> Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot : Handshake
Note left of Slack Server (Socket Mode): Establish Socket Mode connection

Slack Server (Socket Mode)->> Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot : Sends "hello" event
Note left of Slack Server (Socket Mode): Confirms successful connection

User-->>Slack Server (Socket Mode): Adds emoji to a message.

Slack Server (Socket Mode)->>Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot: Sending "reaction_added" payload

> Note left of Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot: Event received

Reviewer 3: your app basically interacts with two servers, one slack http server that is used to receive the `ticket` and the `app_id`, and uses these two to establish a connection to the websocket server. please reflect this in your diagram.

``` 

## Background context
[WebSocket](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket) is a communication protocol that enables simultaneous bidirectional data exchange between a client and a server over a single, long-lived connection. Unlike HTTP, which relies on the request-response model, WebSocket is ideal for scenarios where real-time, interactive and low-latency communication is necessary.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
Client -->> Server: Initiate WebSocket Connection
Server -->> Client: WebSocket Response
Server -->> Client: WebSocket Response
Server -->> Client: WebSocket Response

> Server -->> Client: WebSocket Response

Reviewer 3: Not only the server but client can sends a message in any instance of time. I would remove `Response` keyword since there is no `Request` or `Response` in websocket.

Reviewer 2: well, there is a response, but not always, so yeah, can be must a `message`

```

In Slack, WebSocket is employed as part of its [Socket Mode](https://api.slack.com/apis/connections/socket) feature to facilitate real-time notifications between Slack's servers and third-party applications or bots. The [Slack Event API](https://api.slack.com/apis/connections/events-api) is a tool that lets you receive real-time notifications of specific events in a Slack workspace such as messages, reactions, and user presence changes.

> ## Define AsyncAPI Version, API Information, and Server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Define AsyncAPI version, API information, and server
```

We observe sentence capitalization for headers, let's make sure to fix them all :)

You start your AsyncAPI document by specifying the AsyncAPI version and essential information about your Slack application's API which includes details such as the `title`, `version` and `description`.

> The `ws` server section allows you to define the protocol and specify information about the URLs your application will use, such as  `host`, `protocol` and `description`.

Reviewer 3: `ws` is not a `server section`, it is the name of your server. I would change it to something more descriptive, like `SlackServer` or `Slack` Or `SlackWebsocket` 🤷

<Remember>
The WebSocket URL is generated  by invoking the <a href="https://api.slack.com/methods/apps.connections.open">apps.connections.open</a> method from Slack’s API. You use the authentication tokens obtained during the configuration of  <code>Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot</code> to generate this URL.
</Remember>

```
asyncapi: '3.0.0'
info:
  title: Create an AsyncAPI Document for a SlackBot with WebSockets
  version: '1.0.0'
  description:  |
    The Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot manages popular messages in a Slack workspace by monitoring message reaction data using Slack's Event API.
    
servers:

>   ws:

Reviewer 3: you can define another http server here. (the slack http api that your app uses to receive the `ticket` and the `app_id`)

Author: I did have a conversation with @derberg about including the WebSocket URL generation in the AsyncAPI document. We decided to stick with the info in the `Remember` tag for now and keep the tutorial simple by focusing only on WebSockets.

    host: wss://wss-primary.slack.com/
    protocol: wss

>     description: Websocket URL generated to communicate with Slack

Reviewer 3: this should be the description of your server. something like `Slack Socket Mode server, used to receive events from a slack workspace.`

```

## Define Channels and  Bindings

The `channels` attribute defines a communication channel for the event. The `address` specifies where the channel is tuned in to receive messages while the `messages` property defines a key-value pair where each key corresponds to the event it's set up to handle.

The WebSocket URL generated for `Heart-Counter-Slack-Bot` includes authentication tokens, and this protocol-specific data is represented using the `bindings` attribute. By utilizing the `query` object, you can outline the parameters needed for the connection and the conditions they must meet. 

```
channels:
  root:

>     address: /

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    address: /link/
```

Reviewer 2: `link/` should be part of server `pathname`

>     address: /

Reviewer 3: since we have support for address parameters in v3 I would do it like this:
```
    address: /link/?ticket={ticket}&app_id={app_id}
    parameters:
      ticket:
        default: dfaadfasdfasdfcf
      app_id:
        default: b02112d9364cb2fe
```

now I can specify where these parameters are going to come from , headers or message body. not sure why we still support query parameters for websocket in bindings.

maybe @fmvilas or @derberg can enlighten us here.

Reviewer 2: @KhudaDad414 interesting, indeed text: `Query parameters and fragments SHALL NOT be used, instead use bindings to define them.` is no longer in v3. Dunno though if intentionally or lost in translation 🤔

Reviewer 2: ok, this constraint is still there, query params should be part of the websocket binding

https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/986

Reviewer 3: thanks @derberg. It have become clear now. 🙇
